# Composers-Assistant---Python

The “Composer’s Assistant", is a MIDI generation tool that provides digital musicians with a way to work with
MIDI that doesn’t start off with manually drawing into a piano roll. The program allows musicians to harness
generative programs to give themselves a quick jumping-off point in their composition, production, or any other
activity that uses MIDI data.

My project addresses the lack of any sort of productive use of generative computing in music, especially with the
rise of generative music AI softwares such as Suno AI and Mureka.
The Indian mode also addresses the lack of Indian-classical-music-friendly software. MIDI in itself is not pleasant
to work with in this style of music, hence a program that molds MIDI to work here is a step in the right direction,
although the limitations of General MIDI instruments still shines through in my project.
One limitation with Indian mode is that it is converting all elements from Indian music to western music terms to fit
within DAW and MIDI requirements, which was something I could not get around in this project.

## Using the program
The user begins by choosing between Western and Indian mode. They then input different parameters to create a
quick and easy MIDI file to stem their own work from. This file contains different MIDI regions that the user can use
however they’d like, from chords and melodies, to drum patterns and rhythms. The file is made to prioritise the
user’s agency in terms of how they use the regions, which is why most elements are just a single region.

## Technical details
This program uses python with the random, midiutil and tkinter packages.
The program's structure is based on referencing small functions in one main function for each composition mode.
Each small function performs a specific task, such as generating lists of chord notes, generating times for rhythm
patterns, etc. They are then called in the main composition function based on user input, and the data generated by
these functions is added to the MIDI file at the end.

This format allows for the easy addition of further functionalities and modes. The formatting and use of functions
mimics how classes would be used, which could be done instead.
Regarding methods used, the random package is used throughout. Using random.choices allows the program to
generate melodies that are random, but still tonal and that make sense in whichever key the user selects. Additionally,
the program uses for loops for traversal and generation, and if conditions for classification for discrete parameters.
